---
layout: post
title: First notes on what I am
date: 2025-02-26
---
My investigations on metaphysical essentialism began months ago when I was asking myself the nature of the self. What am I, exactly, and what is it to be a human?  — Those were the questions I pursued. In the middle of the inquiry I began to face myself with fundamental issues in metaphysics, particularly those that meddle with the concepts of "essence", "properties" and "universals". How an inquiry on the nature of the self turned to be an inquiry on the most fundamental questions one can ask in metaphysics? It happened because I _am_ a human — not just conventioned to be so, and I _am essentially_ a human — not accidentaly so.

To argue for those theses was beyond what I could pursue, given that a good amount of epistemology would also have to be in play, but I'll show two arguments that open the possibility for the theses to be tenable.
# I am human
I will assume some things. I will assume a realist conception of the truth predicate as a correspondence to the world, which can be viewed, I guess, as an indirect product of the perenial thought that for something to be, there also must be a reason for why it is: for something to be true, there also must be a reason for it; something that grounds its truthness.

Which kind of things can be true? Propositions, sentences, judgments. The most common form of judgment is when we ascribe a subject some property, like when we say "My computer _is grey_", "The sun _is shining right now_" and "João _is human_". We take a lot of these judgments to _be true_, and we are assuming that something makes them true. What is it that could make "João _is human_" true? 

Some will argue that we collectively convention things to be in a certain way. That in my garden is a tree of a certain species because we conventioned it to be so, but there are no _real species_, given the current evolutionary big picture we got of the living organism on earth. Society thinks that abortion is an evil because of social practices that were installed due to this and that historical process, but there's no inherent _evil_, just a way of labelling things. The examples go on.

One could go further and hold that all judgments are "true" due just to convention. I don't mind the idea that some truths are conventional, in fact, I'm very fond of this idea. But to get all the way down the conventionalist road is to either abandon the very idea of reality-grounded truth, and the reason for it is simple:

Suppose that we buy the thesis that all truths are due to convention. We find, by pressing the radical conventionalist a bit, that for this to be true there must be some particular kind of entity which plays the role of the conventioner: it will be a human, a person or whatever. Anyway,  it will be something that thinks, a _res cogitans_, a mind. The source of all truth is, therefore, the existence of minds conventioning among themselves. What is it to be a mind, though? What is it to be a _res cogitans_? Could it be something given by convention? For the radical conventionalist, it had to be just so. The problem, now patent, is that conventions _are_ in virtue of minds, and minds _are_ in virtue of convention. What grounds what? What came first? Think about it for a second, and you will notice that the notion of grounded truth just ceased to be intelligible.

What this teaches us is that if some judgements are indeed true, the reason for some of them to be true is not subjective, or mind-dependent. In effect, for something to be a mind an objective reason that grounds its _being a mind_ must be in play. To be a mind is to be objectively a mind. To apply that to _being human_ would be a bit of a strecth, if we don't supply this reasoning with further considerations from anthropology and epistemology. What I say for now is that _to be human_ in a significant way is on the horizon, because part of what we think that makes something human is to be a person, which is to be an individual substance of _rational_ nature.
# I am essentially human
Rational _nature_? Do things have _natures_? Precisely. Maybe what I'll now argue about natures doesn't translate well the meaning of "nature" this definition of "person" I gave ascribes to. They do relate, though. What I will understand by "nature" is something that constitutes an _individual_ and grants it all sorts of modal truths about it: it would be in virtue of me being by nature human that I am _capable_ of painting, speaking etc., and at the same time it would be in virtue of me being by nature human that I _could not_ know how is it like to be a bat. We just saw that things are of certain kinds (and sometimes objectively so). Can we argue for them to be of a kind by nature?

I'll again assume some things. I'll assume that the possible world machinery models our modal talking well enough with the idea of transworld identity. I'll also assume that all truths of identity and non identity between things are grounded in intrinsic features of the things. I'll assume a deflated meaning of "nature" as an _modally_ essential property: $P$ is essential to $x$ if, and only if, in every possible world that $x$ exists $x$ is $P$. If we grant these premises, the argument is straightforward: Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that things don't have essential properties. Therefore there is possibly an $x$ and a $y$ which aren't essentially of any kind and $x \neq y$. Take a possible world $w_{1}$ with $x$ and $y$. Then there's a possible world $w_{2}$ with $y$ and $x$ that is identical to $w_{1}$, except that $x$ and $y$ have "switched roles": in $w_{2}$, the facts that in $w_{1}$ would be of $x$ are in reality facts about $y$ and the facts that in $w_{1}$ would be of $y$ are in reality facts about $x$. Consider the livelier example of a possible world that is exactly like our world except that Plato and Socrates have switched roles: Plato is actually the master of Socrates, and it was he who actually drank the hemlock. At the same time, it is Socrates who is born from what in our world we would identify as Plato's parents, and it is also him who wrote The Republic, Parmenides etc. If things don't have essential properties, a possible world just like so is forthcoming. But then, what makes our Plato unequal to the switched-role possible world's Socrates? Nothing, as they have the same intrinsic features. So, by our assumption that inequalities must be grounded in intrinsic features of the things involved, a possible world like this can't exist. Therefore, our inital assumption that all things don't have essential properties is false.

But are our assumptions really true? Take what I consider to be the most fragile one: that all truths on identity and non identity between things are grounded in intrinsic features of the things. I think that just as _some_ things are of certain kinds by convention, some things just simply _are_ by convention, and thus its identity conditions are fixed by convention as well. But as long as there some things whose identity conditions must be given by intrinsic features, then we can say that there are things that have properties essentially (I kept the assumption general as it is because that's how it is conceived in Penny Mackie's _How Things Might Have Been_ for the sake of a different argument). That there are _some_ things whose identity conditions must be given by intrinsic features is a thesis that seems to be much more friendlier to those that ascribe to a sparse view of properties, which I am very fond of. If properties are sparse and objects are in virtue of modes (or "instantiation") of these sparse properties, would to be rational one of them? Again I'm strecthing my conclusions. What I leave to the reader is the reasonable possibility that I am not just a human, but I am so by nature.